This is an interview with Esther Raab and it's made in New Jersey. Hello Esther.
Hi.
Which year were you born and where?
In which year?
Yes.
In 1922.
In Chelm?
In Chelm.
In Poland?
Yes.
So, can you talk about your family? Do you want me to ask questions?
Whatever is convenient for you.
It is most convenient that you talk about your family house.
I had a very nice family. We were two children, which for Europe was unusual. [laughs]
Yes, it was.
And my father was, I would say, comfortable.
He was a businessman, my father, and we had a good life.
And I have here pictures from our house. We were very comfortable.
I would love to make a photo of those pictures later, if you agree?
Yes.
Later, not now.
Yes, sure.
Okay. Did you have a brother or sister?
A brother.[points finger] I still have a brother.
Good for you.
He was born in 1917.
And he's still there.
Yes.
Did he also go through Sobibor?
No. When they took him to Sobibor, and they shot my father on the march
to Sobibor, he like landed on top of him and came home alive.
That is a miracle. It was a miracle. Absolutely.
So let's go back to your family house.
Yes.
It is a shocking story.
Yes. I have the family house picture, everything. Later this would go to the gentile
who saved me my brother and would have given his life to save my father.
That is after you got out of Sobibor? After the escape?
No, right there. My brother didn't go to Sobibor. He escaped from Staw-Nowosiulki, that was
a small Arbeiterlager. And he escaped right away. He went to a gentile who was a very good friend,
he was with my father like this. He went there and he took him in and kept him.
Unbelievable.
Yes.
But let us go to you. You were eighteen already when the war broke out.
How old?
Eighteen?
Younger, you know. Seventeen.
Seventeen.
Yes.
Did you go to school?
Yes. I finished public school and then I went to a Catholic school.
Catholic?!
Yes, my mother felt that I got a better education in
a Catholic school and they were very nice to me.
So, was your family still religious?
What?
Was your family religious?
Very religious.
Very religious, but still...
Yes, my mother always wore... A sheitel.
A sheitel. Yes, very religious. But my mother liked the crowd in
the Catholic school better than the crowd in the public school.
Because they were better educated?
They thought you would get different manners and you were with nice kids, that's why they did it.
Sure. I understand. But before you went to the Catholic school,
had you been seeing a lot of Catholic girls, or was it new?
Friends in the street.
Everybody was friends.
Yes, in the street! And my mother felt that I got Hebrew education in the
afternoon everyday. And she felt that the company that I got there was much
better for me. First of all, only girls. That's what she felt .
And at home she kept a very strict Jewish household?
Yes. I told you, my father wore a...
Beard.
...beard and my mother a sheitel and she came from a very Jewish, religious
family. But she figured, she has one daughter, why not give her the best?
Sure. I understand.
You know, people had houses full with maybe five or six children
who had to wear a uniform in this school. She felt it was...
Better.
...better.
Sure.
Because I had a Jewish education.
Were you prepared as a girl for your future to have a Jewish household?
Yes.
Can you tell about it?
What did they teach you?
To eat kosher.
Which is complicated. [laughs]
Yes. And to have nice friends, it didn't matter they were Jewish or not. I don't
think my mother made a big deal. If I brought non-Jewish friends, they would eat at
our table, because mostly they were poor, you know? And we had plenty to eat [laughs],
which was a problem. We lived very comfortably in Chelm. My father had a mill with partners
and he was a comfortable man. He had a lot of non-Jewish customers.
And did you have close family living near?
Yes. In the same city.
Chelm was a pretty big city at that time?
Yes, I think it had maybe more than ten thousand Jews. They had a Hebrew high school,
a Besiako which was a Jewish-paid school, so I went there after public school.
I used to go there for two hours so as to learn Hebrew, and my mother had the dream that
maybe I would go to Krakow, to Besiako, and there maybe find a husband or whatever.
Were you talking about what was happening to Jews in Germany? Were you aware of that?
We didn't know that much, no. We felt that Hitler wasn't so popular in my young life.
So, when did you feel the danger started coming? It was first the Russians who came, of course.
Yes. My father had one customer, a gentile. He was one of his biggest customers, whom he had
helped a lot, he had escaped from Russia. My father met him on the street and he said, what are
you doing here, you live in an attic, how do you make a living? Do you have acquaintances? He
said, if someone lent me half a sack of flour, I could bake bread in the basement and make a
living. My father said, I'll give you half a sack of flour, don't worry. And to make this
story short, that man became the richest in our city and never forgot my father.
He became a righteous?
What did he become?
A baker.
Okay.
He opened three stores and had a lot of people working for him and never disappointed my father with
any behaviour. He considered my father a most honest and trustworthy man, they became real friends,
and the main thing, they respected each other. Those are the people that saved our lives.
When did you feel the danger for the first time coming?
I didn't, because we lived in a German neighbourhood and I had friends, rich German girls,
who went to school with me. We still did our homework together when a brother (of one of them)
already put on a uniform, but when he walked by our window... "niks Jude, niks Jude".
But it started. At one stage it started, when did it start?
What do you mean?
I mean, at one stage the Germans came.
Oh, it came and my mother remembered the First World War and she said, you sit at home, and you
do your own thing and you go on with your business, and the Germans are the nicest people.
But they came.
When they came, the first day we knew right away.
Why?
I'll show you where we lived, across the street were all Germans, Catholics who worked in the industry.
They had a lot of industry in the town and the girls all were my friends. My brother and that one
brother were also friends. They had a beautiful home, I don't know how many rooms, about ten, twelve
rooms. But we could come in there and they treated us well. There was also one house occupied by one
family, a big house. We had a big mental institution in Chelm, the biggest in Europe. And they used
to take care of the mentally ill, so they gave my father the business.
It was a good life?
Yes.
So how did it change?
When they came in and my mother said, everybody is going to sit down and let's
not go out, because we read the papers already. But we couldn't believe that they
could be such a mean people, that they had something against honest people.
So that was a shock?
A big shock. And most of the Jews from Chelm, like the working class or the poor people
went away, because before we had had the Russians and they encouraged them to go away
to Russia and to communism. But my father was far from a communist.
Be careful with your hand and the microphone please.
What?
Okay, it's fine. You have your hand on the microphone.
Like this?
Yes, like that, you can't hear. That's not good.
No?
This way it's better. Now it's fantastic. So, the poor people went with the Russians?
Yes, because of the work. Poland wasn't anti-Semitic, but my father was in the business with
all those Polacks and he didn't have any grudge against them or hard feelings. He did his business,
he paid his bills and they paid their bills. And we lived one next to another.
So he never even discussed to go East with the Russians?
No.
And then the Germans came. When did you see them for the first time?
They were probably prepared for a bad time, but not that bad. My father used to go every
day to the Polacks. We had a lot of stores that he supplied, so we never felt anything.
And then, can you tell me how it changed, what changed and how?
First of all they organized all the Jews for Friday morning in the middle of the town.
Then they started marching them. Towards another city. We didn't know what they were
doing and why. On that march they killed my father. My brother fell on top of him and got
wounded. We saw it was not a joke. People weren't just talking, they meant it.
He came back to the house, your brother?
Yes!
Wounded?
No, he went to a gentile farmer who took care of my brother's wound. Then he let us know where he
had landed. Near the Russian border. My mother went and got him. My mother was a young woman.
Sure, and then?
So we had lost my father. All those gentiles who had dealt with my father
continued, but in a careful way. But this gentile who saved our lives didn't
give up, because he knew what my father had done for him.
So what did he do?
He used to buy and give my father the profit. And then he said a couple of times, he used to
call him a Brumtje. My father's name was Abraham. He said, I think they took away a Brumtje
and that couldn't succeed. But the friendship had been for so many years, he would have done
whatever he could. If the Germans wouldn't kill my father, he would still be a rich man. He
had become a rich man. He had a house full of children, many children, and he never carried that
grudge, that German grudge. He felt that nothing good would come out of it.
Can you tell me the story how he saved you and your mother, can
you tell me the story of how he saved your life? [louder]
Yes. He helped us. How, an awful lot.
Tell me.
When the Nazis started taking over, he sent bread and flour during summer. He had bought a farm,
he sent us bed stables. So we didn't feel things. We felt if we have a problem, we can go to
him. But then they put us in a ghetto. You know? That wasn't good. But he always helped us. And
you know, if a man helps you with a loaf of bread, even we were only two children...
So you were put in the ghetto of Chelm?
Yes.
How did that go, how did that happen?
I want to show you we had a beautiful private house.
Yes, you'll show me later, yes.
We lived in a very fancy neighbourhood when they decided to make a ghetto. So they put us
with another family, two children, us, and my mother, my father wasn't alive, all in one
room with the kids. And my mother couldn't sleep because they had small children and the
poor things were hungry and they cried the whole time. So we moved, we had family in Siedliszcze,
not far from us, and they said we should come and stay with them.
In Liske? Siedliszcze. Siedliszcze, yes?
And we moved there. My mother said one of our uncles had a bakery, she could work in the
bakery and I could help with the children. It would maybe be easier than being in that house,
but you know, I think the neighbours didn't like it that we moved. Had to move.
Why?
They were so accustomed to us. Across the street lived a German family. The girl went to school with
me. To high school. I went to business school. And they just didn't like it. I don't think our
neighbours would say no when asked, do you want the Terners, our name was Terner, to live here? You
know, I used to knit for them, I don't know how to say, they didn't abuse us. They just said good
morning to you and maybe deep down they had some thoughts, but we didn't feel it.
Who told your mother that your father had been killed? [louder]
My brother came back.
And how was your mother?
My mother's whole world was gone. She had lost her husband and she felt they had had
a very good life, you know, together. We weren't poor, we lived in a comfortable house,
my brother had a room, I had a room. In Europe they didn't have it like this. In a
beautiful neighbourhood. All the people had houses, not just rooms, houses!
So you moved to Siedliszcze?
Yes. And there we started going to work. My father wasn't alive anymore. My mother
was very upset and we had to protect her from going to work, because she wasn't able
to work, like walking miles a day. I'm making it short, my mother wanted to make it
easier and less responsible for us, because we used to take her away into the woods
so they wouldn't take her to work. Because she couldn't have lasted.
There was forced labour in Siedliszcze?
Right away. Yes. Not in our city. But all over the countryside. Right away. My mother didn't
want to be a burden to the two of us. So she went to the police and asked to be shot. And
they did her the favour. She felt that the two of us, or maybe one, would survive.
So she went to the Germans?
Yes! The Polish and German police were still the same. And they shot her.
And what did they do with her?
We buried her there. Because we went to work and they got her, I mean, they didn't
get her, she went in. They threw her at the end of the woods and when we came
they'd buried her there. Not that we found remains of her. No.
You didn't? But you gave her a service?
Yes.
As if she were buried? Yes.
That's beautiful.
[sighs] What could you do?
No, it's beautiful. It's beautiful if you don't have the body, still to make the service.
Yes. I mean, they didn't burn her or anything like what we saw later, you know, in Sobibor.
And so you were alone with your brother then?
I was alone with my brother. They moved us to a section
and we got like a room and a kitchen. You know.
Still in Siedliszcze?
Yes. We could go to work but we didn't. We missed our mother. You know, at that time I
think we felt that everybody is gonna go, sooner or later. And we just figured that, maybe,
my mother was better off. That she was a smart woman and went to ask to be shot.
What kind of work did you do then?
I would mostly pull weeds and clean woods and all that.
Hard manual labour.
Yes.
But you managed.
Yes. We had still some valuables my mother gave to us. You know? And
from the farmers we could buy bread or a little meat or whatever.
You had enough to eat?
In the beginning, yes. Not in Sobibor. [laughs]
No, of course not [laughs]. How long did that last? I guess this is '42, or '41? Is this 1942?
It was already '41. Then they made the ghetto and they didn't know what to do, those Germans.
I mean, they were miserable. They took us, they took young people away and they used them for manual
labour. You know? They had a lot to build, they had a lot to construct, they came to Poland. Poland
wasn't a poor country. Plenty to eat. Plenty mills and plenty meat. They were poor in Germany.
Then they started chasing us from one ghetto to another ghetto, to other cities.
You were chased from one ghetto to another. Where did you go, can you remember?
Sure! I was in Siedliszcze, then they made a camp near Siedliszcze and we used to go to work from
there. They really didn't make such a big use of our labour. It was like a game for them. It was
a game. Meanwhile they checked you, things you were carrying with you, and they would find a nice
watch, a nice dress, a pair of shoes, and take it off, you know? Whatever they could use.
So, after Siedliszcze you went where?
Siedliszcze they made like Judenrein, you know? Yes.
They took us to Staw-Nowosiulki camp. But nothing special. Just going to work. They
weren't really using those people's talents, just moving them here and there. They just moved you around.
Yes. So I came there. Then we found out that they built camps were going
to destroy young people. They'ld keep them as long as they could and
then... I think they wanted to keep themselves busy, too.
What do you mean with keeping themselves busy?
Not to go to the Front. They were very afraid of the Russians.
Yes, they were.
And they figured, as long as they can manipulate here, they won't
[microphone is moved] Then the SS came. The SS were miserable.
Worse than the Wehrmacht? Till then it was the Wehrmacht?
For a while, here. And I don't think that the Wehrmacht
was so bad. They decided to kill all the Jews.
So what happened when the SS came? What was the difference?
The SS were schooled (educated) and they sent people to the camps. They opened up the camps, the SS.
And you knew that those camps were being opened? You knew about those camps before you were there?
Oh, sure, you didn't have no choice, you had to go.
But you knew that those camps existed.
The death camps.
Yes. So what happened to you?
They took me from Siedliszcze and I went to a camp. They picked me out to work. They asked, who knows
how to sow, whatever they asked I knew. I knew, but I figured, if you have a trade you maybe can survive.
Me and my brother were in a smaller camp like cleaning wooded areas. In the middle of the night they
rounded us up and we knew we were going to a death camp. But we never believed they were taking live
people, useful people. We first came in a smaller camp and then they took us to - where did they take
us? To a new camp, where there were Jews. We used to go to work every day. I don't know why they
needed that work. We were there about two months and then they started to send us to Sobibor. They
took out eight girls and we thought the rest were destroyed. We felt, as long as our clothes last
and we can sell our belongings, we gonna survive. We thought, maybe the Americans will come and survive
(rescue) us, you know? There they took out eight girls.
In order to take care of the Germans?
Yes.
And that was your job?
No, I didn't take care, they didn't.
What did you do?
I started sorting luggage, clothes which were brought. Then we realized that all those people
were getting killed. We saw there was no way that the Germans would lose the war so fast,
that we should survive. The young used to bring like the leftovers from the little towns
and cities into the death camps. We heard that they had opened up Auschwitz, but you didn't
have no choice. There was no choice. Just to go by the day and pray.
You still prayed?
Yes!
A lot?
You see, I have a ring here, from Sobibor. From an older man, an artist in woodwork. Unbelievable.
I asked him and he told me, he knew that I wouldn't eat bread at Pesach, you know? So he said,
could you organize a few potatoes. And I said, I will try, but you know, to steal five potatoes,
you have to give your hat. So I said, I will try. And I organized eight potatoes. And he gave me
that ring. He said, that ring will save your life. And I'm still wearing it.
Wonderful. So you were allowed to have a ring in Sobibor? No.
But how did you do that, then?
I just rolled it in my... Bra.
Yes, and I carried it.
Of course.
You know, you either became religious, or not religious at all. But it's easier to believe that some
miracles gonna happen, or maybe the Germans will drop dead. Even now, you don't wanna be dead, but
then you have to give up. I came to Sobibor before Pesach, and there came a cousin of mine to a rabbi's
son. From Izbica. And he said, we are not gonna remain here. We have to kill them all before. I said,
what a big talk, a rabbi's son gives you a sermon, you know, but they used that time, changed our inmates,
you know. If a transport came in, they picked out new people every time. They told us that the war was
coming to an end, one day you had to lose. You're gonna go into the frying pan anyway, so let's try.
Then, a few weeks later, they started bringing Russian soldiers whom they'd caught. They were killing
us, too. And the young men figured out, maybe the war isn't so good for them, you know, and let's
organize. We started to think, the war didn't go because they didn't send out so much clothes from
the people. They didn't, because they were afraid that on the way they're gonna get caught. With
us inside it wasn't so strict, they got used to us, you know.
yes?
Huh?
Ja?
They figured, we had them in our hands so that they cannot do nothing to us. And we did.
So it was really changing?
Yes. I don't know if the Germans wanted the change. But they were so organized
with the SS and the SA. I guess everybody did what he wanted to do. Then they
brought a lot of women from Russia.They just let them live and they didn't
go to work, maybe they used them for different reasons, you know?
They imported a group of Russian women into Sobibor?
They built a barracks for them and their convenience.
Were those women Jewish?
No. Russian women. They wouldn't dare.
So there was a kind of a brothel in Sobibor?
Yes.
Gosh, nobody told me.
Oh yes. They put up two, they wouldn't take a Jewish woman.
It would be Rassenschande.
That's right. And they called me, he was there, they found my name. Demjanjuk?
Demjanjuk. He was in that brothel?
He wasn't in that brothel. But during the days they worked in a Russian camp between
Sobibor and Piaski. They used to bring those men by train here. I remember...
Well, explain to me.
Demjanjuk.
Better, please. I don't understand the full story. There
was another camp with Russians, and where was Demjanjuk?
What did you say?
There were those Russian women, and you say, Demjanjuk was...
They brought Russian women and they built barracks in our yard for them,
not the rich ones, and they used to serve them, you know, and they used
to live there. When the war started to go bad, they brought in...
Demjanjuk? Whom did they bring?
Russian women, too.
But what was Demjanjuk's role in all this? I didn't understand that.
Who?
Demjanjuk, what did he do?
He was in that camp between Sobibor and Piaski. He was trained there and probably he helped. I worked
in the Waffenkammer, it's in my book, I used to clean the bullets which they used to shoot children.
They brought Demjanjuk, it was in the papers. [laughs] I was there, not that I gave an interview to anybody,
and he was there during the day they had training. They had shortages in the army, they were already
confused, like they said, and they didn't have transport. Demjanjuk used to come to the Waffenkammer,
you know? We used to clean the bullets and put them into the guns and we cleaned out the guns, when there
were no transports. And they used to take him away to kill the children.
Because children were killed by bullets? Oh yes.
Not by gas?
Don't forget that I was almost the last one there.
So how did you land in the Waffenkammer?
In the Waffenkammer? When they didn't have no transports, they didn't have... Anything to sort. I understand. Where was your brother by then?
My brother went to a farmer, he jumped away before they took us to Sobibor. My brother jumped
from the barracks and went to Matsemiok, to that gentile. Who took him in. I didn't know
that he survived, you know. I forgot he'd gone. And then, when I escaped from...
Sobibor.
..the camp, the night before we had planned the escape and the Russian soldiers were with us, you
know. We were inmates, maybe a couple of hundreds, that's all. You know, we weren't such a mass,
because they stopped it or whatever. We went to sleep and everybody said goodbye and we figured,
what can we do, they will take us. That was already towards the end. I went to sleep, and I dreamt
my mother came to the camp and she said, you go to Matsemiok and there you survive. From Sobibor
to Matsemiok would take me a day or a few hours. But as I climbed the fence I got a bullet here.
And I came to a farmer and I told him, showed him. They knew already, good for you, you killed all
of them, you know? Then I told him, he said I'll heal it for you. I killed a pig. An old man kept
me twelve days, I didn't tell him where I wanted to go, I told him the opposite because I was still
afraid. He said, don't worry, my son will take you out into the woods. It took me two weeks to
get there, to Matsemiok. I came into the barn, you know, I knew his lair and I came into the barn.
There was me and two friends. We came into the barn and I said, here we're going to wait until
Mantsemiok. I asked around, is he alive, and they said, after two weeks my brother was sitting on
top on the world and I was underneath. Waiting for Mantsemiok.
And Selma Engel was with you, and Chaim?
No. Samuel Lerer and one of the cooks and a Russian, Abraham, I don't know anymore. So I lay there
and my brother said I'm a ghost, you know. You wait so long, I made it very fast for you.
You did, yes, incredibly fast. So you knew you were going to escape? You were told to be prepared?
Oh yes! I put on my uniform, I mean, we've put on like two pairs of underwear, not everybody in the
camp knew. They told me not to put on many. How many pockets I had, I should have put in sand.
Why?
Because if you throw sand in the face you can stick a knife in the stomach. We were trained
that there. The Russians and my cousin, the Polacks killed him. He was outside already.
And he was one of the organizers of the uprising. Yes.
Wasn't he? Together with Pechersky.
Yes.
So you were really trained for the outbreak? Oh yes!
Tell me about it.
I had all pockets full of sand. And they told us, if you
throw sand and he grabs his eyes, you can stick him.
That's very clever.
Yes.
So did you see those Russian women coming?
Yes, the Russian women, sure! They were from us, like my house maybe, they built barracks for them.
Did you have any contact with them?
No. You weren't allowed. But we could say hi. We all knew how to
speak Russian, but you were very careful, you didn't know.
You spoke Jiddish in the camp or what language, Polish?
Mostly we talked German.
German?
Yes, because they didn't like, Was verdrehst Du den Kopf wieder, you know. You had to talk German.
If it's not too difficult, would you mind to describe a day, a normal day in Sobibor?
We got up in the morning, we had the entrée, you know, and they gave you a cup of
coffee, sometimes you saved a piece of bread from the night time, and you went to
work. The Germans loved to work there. This way they didn't go to the front.
Ja. At that time it was pretty important for the...
There were already...
So then you went to work, which was sorting clothes.
Yes.
And then?
And then we got ready, we knew they scared those going on vacation. It wasn't
big, maybe thirty people, men. Germans used to watch us, that's all. In the sorting place? In the place where you worked?
Yes. And in the evening they used to lock us in.
Were they cruel in the sorting place or was it just working?
The sorting place? We were just working and putting things together, packing
them up neatly to send them away. There used to come a lot of customers. They
probably stole it and used to sell it to those who used to come. But was there any cruelty in the sorting place or was it only outside?
The barracks were used down to the ground and there was no heating or
anything during the winter, you know. In the summer there wasn't airconditioning,
and I guess those Nazis who had privileges were sent.
To Sobibor.
Yes. First of all that was already the end of the war. And second, they felt they lost the war.
Okay, you came to your shelter and you found your brother.
Yes. I told him that we were planning already to escape, you know. He said, I had to think that
we are planning an escape and that I escaped and then got a bullet in the head and I was wounded.
And he said, we're not gonna tell Montsiniok that we came with three other people, two other
people. Whatever he'll give us to eat, you gonna share it. If you could come with two, we are
not gonna send them away. He was there already as long as I was in Sobibor.
Was it a safe place?
He had a farm. Montsiniok was a rich man and he bought a lot of ground and he built a farm
and he felt, you know, it's a strange country for him and and that's it. He remembered
my father and he said that he would do anything to save my father's children.
It's always the same man you talked about in the beginning?
Yes.
Okay. So you stayed in the barn?
Yes! We stayed almost a year, not a year, eight, nine months we stayed. With my brother,
you know. He supplied us, helped us, he was very happy that we survived. And I'm still
friends with his children, they get a thousand dollars every Christmas. We brought them
a lot of jewellery, you know, that we had stolen from the Sortierungsplatz during the last
days, but it wasn't enough. But he helped us. We survived because of him.
And because of your God.
Yes.
You just told me you became very religious.
Yes, I became religious. He was very religious, it's
so easy to become religious when you are in trouble.
If you say religious, can you explain a little bit? Did you follow prescriptions?
No. We just believed. I guess that if you help somebody, or you are nice
to somebody, you get in return. Martin isn't alive, but if you'll ever
be in Israël, we have a monument put for him on the way to...
At Yad Vashem?
Yes. We felt he deserved, he had six children and God forbid they would have found us, he
would have gone with the children. We made a monument there for the oldest children and for
him at Yad Vashem and we felt they deserved it. And when the war was ending he was afraid
of the Russians, because he was a Russian, Montsiniok. He was afraid, so we took him out
and we got him settled and we put him in business and the children. I will show you letters
of the children. We always support him. They all were in America already.
Now you were still in the barn in hiding with your brother and
two more, Samuel Lerer and somebody else, when the war ended?
Yes! Sure!
So what happened?
Lerer is one. The other one passed away. He had a sister all the way out, within
a year he passed away. He was older than we. He was a cook with the Ukrainians.
But I'm trying to get back to your story. You were in hiding and then the Russians came?
Yes.
So then?
So we all went out to Chelm
and there they took care of us already. Montsiniok said we should open a bakery shop,
he'ld supply us with the bread. But we didn't have no feelings for Polacks, so they didn't help us.
No, they didn't help us, they harmed us. Wherever
they saw a Jew, they probably hurt him, but not as those Jews.
Did they harm you?
No. I was very lucky. And then, I always was in company, I was with my brother, and so we didn't
have no problems. Then I found my husband and the Polacks wanted to be nice to us.
You found your husband in Chelm?
I knew him from Chelm. From before the war.
How did you meet him?
We were in the same company as his friend and we used to come into the house and that's how
we met. No, we knew each other before the war. He was older, but we were like in the same company,
you know, the same crowd I would say. My husband is a college graduate in Poland.
Did you like him already before the war?
Oh, he was handsome, rich, they were the richest in our city, so what's
there not to like? Now he's sick and I try to help as much as I can.
You should.
Nobody has to teach me this.
Yes, sure. So you met him, he was also coming to Chelm, what...
From Russia.
...had he been doing? From Warsaw?
Yes. I didn't meet him, I knew him, you know, Chelm wasn't such a big
city. I knew him. We started talking and that's how it happened.
And you stayed in Chelm? When did you leave?
No, we left, we didn't wanna stay, it was dangerous. All the Polacks were too dangerous. So,
we left the minute we could leave. When the Russian army started to occupy Germany we moved with
them. Because we felt the safest place still would be Germany, same with the Polacks.
Yes?
They were miserable.
You thought the Polacks were more dangerous than the Germans?
Oh yes!
Despite all your good experiences?
We were very afraid of the Polacks. They thought they lost
the war, the Jews have everything, I hope you are Jewish?
I am!
You know, why should they get everything and they didn't get nothing, they lost the war. They
were miserable, the Polacks. At night we had to lock ourselves in, I'm telling the truth.
You didn't get protection from the Russians?
We used to get protection, but not the protection that we needed. And then, when
I came, my husband's father passed away soon, he survived. He had owned half
the city at least. He didn't ask for return, no, he was afraid, he passed away
soon after the war. That's why we followed the army to Germany.
So when you left Chelm, where did you go to?
They said...
To Germany?
No, the Germans were still fighting the Russians, the war was on. But
we followed with a big crowd, we were there too. It was dangerous.
And where did you end up?
We didn't have a place to land. Nobody wanted us. One was afraid, that maybe they were recognizing
that he did something to the Jews or helps the Nazis, you know, it wasn't so easy.
So you went West.
We figured we will follow, the Germans are now not dangerous. Because they had the wrong
things to settle or to hide, you know? So it wasn't easy until we came to the States.
But you went through a DP camp?
No.
But you didn't go straight to America?
No. But I had friends, Polacks, who I knew they didn't do nothing wrong
to help the Germans. And I was with them, I had the Montsiniok, and all
the children were in America already. I didn't forget them.
But can you please tell me what your itinerary was from Chelm to America?
First of all we had family who left before the war. And as for
politics, you figured maybe there will be more freedom here. Yes?
And America had a good name [laughs].
Sure, but from where did you leave?
From where I left? I left from Germany.
From Germany.
I didn't wanna be in Germany.
So you came here in '45?
Yes.
Were you already married?
Sure! I came with my husband.
You married in Chelm?
No. We married in Poland, in Lublin. Because we didn't
wanna just hang together [laughs], you know?
Sure. You had an official Jewish wedding?
Oh yes! I didn't have a wedding dress. But (we had) a coppoel, a rabbi in Germany,
and we had, you know, not dressed up like a bride, but right away we got married,
because we felt, our parents and we also didn't feel like, you know...
Where did you enter the United States?
We came here, wait a second, more than fifty years ago.
But where? Did you come through New York? Yes!
[laughs] I'm just asking you.
Yes. We came through the...
The...?
Yes.
And then they received you in New York?
There was an organization like the Joint and they helped you. They arranged your passports and stuff
like that. Listen, they had a big organization, and when we came we didn't have no things up on our
sleeves, you know, and we got our papers. And we came here, we had friends here already. My brother
was before us, because my brother's wife is German-born. But this didn't have nothing to do with
it, her parents were still alive, German Jews, nice people. They are not alive anymore.
And then you lived in New York? Or you came here immediately?
We looked for people to be close, you know, we were without people, you understand.
What a mess I'm telling you. And I lost Leon, Leon died, the Polacks...
Feldhauer, yes?
Yes. A lot (of people) from Europe that we had known
before the war went here, so we weren't special.
So you came immediately to Fineland?
Yes.
And you stayed.
Wonderful. [laughs]
Yes, we were very successful here. If you want to work,
no matter where you come from, you can make it.
How many children do you have?
Two.
You have two children.
Yes. Aha. So do you...
Both very well educated.
I have seen that. I have seen Abby.
One is married already, one granddaughter, she's a doctor in Jefferson Hospital and he is
a doctor in Jefferson Hospital. And one grandson is a heart specialist and an emergency whatever.
One is professor, how should I say, he is very educated, she's a manager of a college. One
is in college, one is in a high school, one finished college and is in business.
Gosh! Enormous. What else can I ask?
Sure.
Oh, and one is in law school.
Pfff.
A girl. Gosh.
So I did pretty good.
You did. Now, do you think and dream a lot about Sobibor?
Oh, always.
Or do you try to forget? Always?
Always. You cannot get it out of your mind. My oldest son is very much involved in the Holocaust, you
know. I will show you, I went yesterday with him and he arranged a new college they opened up in Jacksonville.
And he wanted me to go, I went with him. You know. And he's very much involved.
But we are talking about you. You said it never gets out of your mind?
No. I mean, my husband and the second son went to Chelm, this summer. You know why? Because
my husband's father just died the minute the war was ended. He came out, he also had been
hiding, so we built a fence around the cemetery, because there was no place to bury him
except in Chelm. And my husband went this summer with one of my grandsons.
For the next nine months?
[reads from a book] For the next nine months we lived in a bunker under the barn Heidl had built.
We lived like mice, only going out through the hay at night to get a drink of water from the horse,
outside the barn. Mr. Montsiniok at the risk of his own life and his family's lives allowed us to
stay. He brought us food when he could. There is no question he saved us. Yes? The area was still
controlled by the Nazis and growing bands of Polish partisans anxious to kill Jews. Finally, the Russians
drove the Nazis westward and we came out of hiding and returned to Chelm. There I learned that my
mother had been shot and killed by the Nazis. Poland was not a safe place for Jews, returning Jews
were resented and often murdered by their Polish neighbours. Is it good?
Very good.
A group of us, including my future husband, Ees, decided to stay close to the Russian army as it went
towards Germany. In 1945, when the war ended, we found ourselves in Berlin. Ees and I got married,
but on our honeymoon he was accused of being an English spy by the Russians and sentenced to death.
After three years of death row I was able to bribe him out of jail. Should I go again? No.
We were stateless people and did not dare to go back to Poland. We hoped to come to
America and to start our life there. But not until 1950 were we able to come to America.
Before leaving for America another Sobibor survivor came to me and told me he had just
seen Erich Bauer, the Sobibor gas master, on a carrousel in the park.
We had them arrested and I testified at his trial where he was sentenced to life imprisonment.
This was the first of many trials where I would testify. This also started my telling
of the Sobibor story, which I'm still telling to you today.
Thank you. It's enough. Thank you so much. Can I ask you the question, can you tell me what happened
to your husband? You haven't told me yet. You were in Berlin and your husband got arrested?
No. He has a problem with his leg. He cannot walk.
Oh yes. Three years they gave him. What exactly happened? You said they gave him three years. But can you tell me, it was very short.
Yes, in 19.., I said, no.
[sentenced] He was, this was the first of many trials that I would testify. This also started
my telling of the Sobibor story, which I'm still telling you today. Oh, here. Before leaving
for America, another Sobibor survivor came to me and told me he had seen Erich Bauer, the
Sobibor gas master, on a carrousel in the park. That's what you wanted?
No, I want your story, can you put that aside please? Can you
leave that for a moment please, what you have written?
Yes.
So can I ask you a question please?
Yes. [turns pages] What happened.
Just put it down for a moment, please, because I want you to
remember it. What happened to your husband? What exactly?
What happened? My husband went to Russia. Instead of remaining with the Germans, he left to Russia.
There he was accused of being a spy. When he came back, they put him for three years in jail.
In Berlin?
Yes. And I saved enough money and bribed a Nazi Besetz,
I'm sorry for the word, and they let him go.
But was he picked up from the street, or how did it happen in Berlin?
He went for his passport, I think.
Yes? And then they arrested him? Gosh.
The Germans. Okay?
And then we agreed that we would talk a little bit about
religion, how you became religious in Sobibor.
I think I became religious because most of the religious people in Sobibor, they
were the last of the Polish Jews. That's why they finished them all.
But you became religious, what did religious mean?
I came from a religious home and it's much easier when you have something to hang on [laughs]
when things are bad. Some people stopped being religious, but I just came from a home where my parents
were religious and they always blamed it on their God, whoever, it was easier for me.
To be religious?
Yes.
Were you the only one in Sobibor, or were the other girls religious?
No. But when it was Yom Kippur, we all prayed as much as we could. If you are not religious,
you know, you blame that maybe on I don't know whom, but when you have a little belief
in yourself it's much easier to go through a thing like that.
And does religion help you now?
Yes!
Tell me.
I think with raising the family. We are closer, because we have the religion in between us.
So did you ever ask God why is this happening?
We cannot ask God, but if you're religious you don't ask too much. Am I right?
Yes.
And I feel that it was much easier to go through, in Sobibor, if you believed.
But it didn't take the shape of special actions, it was in your head?
No, I figured every night when I went to sleep, that I survived, you know, that surviving
was such a big word. I guess, the way I was brought up... I didn't have enough time really
to do something else. You know? Because I felt faith gave me a lot of strength.
I imagine. Also while we were having lunch, Esther, or cookies,
you said you recognized Demjanjuk? That you knew who he was?
When?
When you read about him, you know who Demjanjuk was, you said.
With coffee and cookies?
When we were eating cookies.
Yes.
Yes, you told me that you recognized John Demjanjuk.
Oh, Demjanjuk?
Ja.
I mean, I have now a paper where he was young. Very young. In Sobibor, probably. I remember faces, listen,
I've been to so many trials, I never made a mistake. I went to more trials, all of them.
How come? You were asked?
I don't know, maybe I was interested in going to trials and I was very
anxious to get it where it's supposed to be. No, I didn't think about
belief to take revenge, but I wanted to get it off my chest.
Because it's always there.
And will never go away.
So you want Demjanjuk also to be punished?
Yes.
So your first trial was in Berlin?
In Berlin, yes.
And then many more followed.
Then I went to Gomerski. Clea gave me the boots and Gomerski was a dog,
they don't come any worse. And then I went to eleven guys on trial.
In Hagen?
To Hagen. There were two brothers, Wolfs, and one Wolf was so good, I mean, he was not guilty
in nothing. And the other one was a dog! Then I went to whose trial? Again? I went to many.
And then, when they made the gas chambers in Sobibor, they didn't have it when we came, that's
when they got the idea to make gas chambers, but first they made it just for children and youngsters.
And then they made it wherever they could get some people to do it.
Have you ever been near the gas chambers?
No. I shouldn't lie. No. I don't know what's inside. I saw them walking to the door.
That you could see from your place?
Yes, because we always felt, let's see what's going on, let's see how they're
doing it. You know? It was curiosity, maybe we'ld have to tell it sometimes. Yes. But
you saw the people going naked from where they got undressed to the gas chambers.
So you had no hope, no?
No. I don't know if I didn't have, I always thought they don't mean me. [laughs] Stupid huh?
You were there? You are still there.
Yes. You saw them walking naked through the walkway to the gas chamber. I never
saw the door to the gas chamber, but I knew where they were going. You didn't
see if they punished somebody and took him there. And you didn't see him.
Is that the image which haunts you most?
No, it was very hard for me to build an image.
You know? We knew the people were not there, we saw they took out, sometimes
if the things were spoiled, we saw they used to bring them in on wagons, all
sorts of things. But you couldn't picture them dead. I don't think so.
How do you take people and just kill them?
It's impossible. But if you have your nightmares,
is it the scare of Sobibor, is it a special image?
Mostly, I will have (nightmares) about the Nazis, you know.
Who either was favourable to everybody, or was a dog.
Is there anything you haven't told you still want to tell about your life or about Sobibor?
Listen, the pictures are here for me, the books are here, I'll live with them
until I die. You cannot erase, that's impossible. Why? And then the why is so
big. You know? It's so big, why did they have to kill those little children? They
didn't give them nothing, no power, no mourning, nothing? Am I right?
Absolutely. I can't answer it for you.
I cannot. I mean, you don't have to be a murderer, a killer. I don't know what you have to be
when you have children at home and you see them dead here from the other end, from the door.
Do you also have this feeling towards the Poles, the Polish population?
That kind of question towards the Poles which haunted you?
Oh yes! The Polacks waited to get everything that the Jews had and (they) didn't have, you
understand, and they were big anti-Semites. They thought that if the Jews have a few onions
more in their gardens it's the Jews' fault. The Poles were very, very anti-Semitic.
Thank you very much, Esther.